# Morgan Specification


### Version 0.0.1 

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [BCP 14](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14) [RFC2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119) [RFC8174](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8174) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

This document is licensed under [The Apache License, Version 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html).

## Introduction 

The Morgan Specification is an open standard for sentiment notation within textual communications. The intent is to allow persons to express emotion combined with an arbitrary quantitative value.

This specification is language-agnostic and unopinionated of its implementation. 

## Table of Contents 
<!-- TOC depthFrom:1 depthTo:3 withLinks:1 updateOnSave:1 orderedList:0 -->

- [Definitions](#definitions)
- [Basic Syntax](#basicSyntax)
- [Advanced Syntax](#advancedSyntax)

<!-- /TOC -->

## <a name="definitions"></a>Definitions 

**Statement:** A Statement is the complete syntactical structure composed of the explicit lexical pattern, `<Sentiment><Assignment><Tally>`.

**Sentiment:** The Sentiment is the textual expression.

**Assignment:** The Assingment is the delimeter that marks the end of the Sentiment and the beginning of the Tally.

**Tally:** The Tally is the value assignment of the Sentiment. Tallies are arbitrary, pseudo-quantitative values. The arbitrary nature of Tallies means that, within the scope of the syntactical rules, all values are allowable.

---

## <a name="basicSyntax"></a>Basic Syntax 

| Component |  Required | Syntax Rules |
| :- | :-: | :- |
| Sentiment | Y | MUST have at least one _alphanumeric_ character immediately to the left of the **Assignment** (case-insensitive). |
| Assignment | Y | MUST be a single _colon_ and placed to the right of the **Sentiment** and to the left of the **Tally**. |
| Tally | Y | MUST begin with a _numeric_ character (signed or unsigned) and MUST end with a _numeric_ character and MUST be placed to the right of the **Assignment**. |

### Examples 

| Syntax | Statement |
| :- | :- |
| Legal | ``I love you:3000`` | 

---

## <a name="advancedSyntax"></a>Advanced Syntax

### Sentiment Naming 

Sentiments MAY begin with a _numeric_ character provided the last character before the Assignment is _alphabetical_ (case insensitive).

| Syntax | Statement |
| :- | :- |
| Legal | `2L2Q:100` |

### Sentiment Spacing 

Sentiments MAY contain spaces between the first and last _alphanumeric_ characters. 

| Syntax | Statement |
| :- | :- |
| Legal | `you fear jazz:10000` |
| Legal | `A passing coyote took pity on me:12`

### Conjoining Statements 

Statements MAY be conjoined by delimeting them with a _comma_ character after the last Tally _numeric_ character. Whitespaces after the _comma_ and before the next Sentiment's _alphanumeric_ character are legal.

| Syntax | Statement |
| :- | :- |
| Legal | `happy:2,joy:2` |
| Legal | `happy:2, joy:2` |

### Truncated Statements 

Truncated Statements contain multiple Sentiments which MUST be assigned the same Tally.

| Syntax | Statement |
| :- | :- |
| Legal | `happy:joy:2` |

### Conjoined Truncated Statements  

Truncated Statements MAY be conjoined by delimeting them with a _comma_ character after the last Tally _numeric_ character. Whitespaces after the _comma_ and before the next Sentiment's initial _alphanumeric_ character are legal.

| Syntax | Statement |
| :- | :- |
| Legal | `pitter:patter:1,shortside:farside:blindside:gimme your best shot:10` |

### Sentiment Combinations 

A Statement MAY contain both truncated and standalone Sentiments.

| Syntax | Statement |
| :- | :- |
| Legal | `scoop of creamed potatoes:slice of butter:1,peas:4,ice cream:1000000000`

### Tally Digit Grouping 

Tallies MAY have digit groupings as any non-numeric character and SHALL exclude the _colon_ character.

| Syntax | Statement |
| :- | :- |
| Legal | `wibbly:1,000,000,000` |
| Legal | `wobbly:1_000_000_000` |
| Legal | `timey:1.000.000.000` |
| Legal | `wimey:1,000_000.000` |

### Tally Spacing 

Tallies MAY have white spaces inbetween the first and last _numeric_ characters. 

| Syntax | Statement |
| :- | :- |
| Legal | `you were absolutely fantastic:10 0000 0 000, and so was I:9` |

### Tally Emojis 

Tallies MAY have emoji characters inbetween the first and last _numeric_ characters.

| Syntax | Statement |
| :- | :- |
| Legal | `let her speak:4🎤000🎤000🎤000` |

### Tally Loading

Tallies MAY have _alphabetical_ characters inbetween the first and last _numeric_ characters.

| Syntax | Statement |
| :- | :- |
| Legal | `listen:1you🏳️‍⚧️are🏳️‍⚧️valid1` |
